                                           From quantum feature maps to quantum reservoir computing:
                                                                      perspectives and applications

                                               Casper Gyurik1, † , Filip Wudarski2, † , Evan Philip1 , Antonio Sannia3,2 , Hossein
                                               Sadeghi1 , Oleksandr Kyriienko4 , Davide Venturelli2 , and Antonio A. Gentile1
                                                                                 1
                                                                                     Pasqal SaS, France
                                                 2
                                                     USRA Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS), USA
arXiv:2510.01797v1 [quant-ph] 2 Oct 2025




                                           3
                                               Institute for Cross-Disciplinary Physics and Complex Systems (IFISC) UIB-CSIC,
                                                                     Campus Universitat Illes Balears, 07122,
                                                                              Palma de Mallorca, Spain
                                                               4
                                                                   School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
                                                                              University of Sheffield, UK
                                                                       †
                                                                           These authors contributed equally




                                                                                            1
                                            Abstract
     We explore the interplay between two emerging paradigms: reservoir computing and quantum
computing. We observe how quantum systems featuring beyond-classical correlations and vast
computational spaces can serve as non-trivial, experimentally viable reservoirs for typical tasks in
machine learning. With a focus on neutral atom quantum processing units, we describe and exem-
plify a novel quantum reservoir computing (QRC) workflow. We conclude exploratively discussing
the main challenges ahead, whilst arguing how QRC can offer a natural candidate to push forward
reservoir computing applications.



I.    INTRODUCTION


     Quantum computing (QC) is a specific model of computation that uses the principles
of quantum mechanics to process information. Unlike the classical bits (0 or 1) used in
the von Neumann architecture, quantum computers use qubits, allowing for superposition
states. Quantum systems exhibit interference and entanglement, which allow qubits to be
correlated in ways that classical bits cannot. Digital computation in this model is carried
out using quantum gates, which are operations that change the state of qubits, similar to
how logic gates operate on bits in classical circuits. Analog operations where the qubits are
evolved according to their intrinsic system behaviour are also possible in quantum circuits.
     While quantum computers grow in size, they remain noisy and limited in size, with a
number of qubits growing to hundreds, they are still sparsely connected and have non-
negligible error rates [1]. Hybrid quantum-classical approaches offer the possibility of en-
hancing capabilities of quantum devices and tailoring them for specific applications [2, 3].
These algorithms show modularity and flexibility, allowing them to exploit existing hardware
while delivering the best performance. Additionally, one can scale the size of the system in
a modular way, connecting registers with a handful of qubits into correlated multi-register
systems with hundreds. The former can serve as a test-bed for theoretical investigations, as
well as numerical simulations, that could be used as a performance benchmark for quantum
hardware runs.
     Quantum computing can be seen as a part of a broader field of physics-based com-
puting, encompassing also analog, reservoir and neuromorphic frameworks. In particular,
reservoir computing leverages upon a complex dynamical system to map inputs into a high-

                                                2
dimensional computational space, and processes readout data to efficiently solve learning
tasks, including time-series predictions and classification [4, 5]. Neuromorphic computing
explores novel ways to process information, attempting to mimic brain processes with the
intent of matching its efficiency. In this regard, some routes towards neuromorphic com-
puting entertain the adoption of reservoir-like mappings enabled by biological or physical
systems [6]. Reservoir computing approaches exemplify heuristic computational paradigms.
These methods typically lack formal performance guarantees but rely on empirical valida-
tion, offering solutions to complex or high-dimensional tasks that otherwise are prohibitively
expensive [7].
   The main appeal of reservoir computing is twofold: (i) because only the linear readout is
trained, the models are relatively easy to optimize while still potentially capturing temporal
dependencies (unlike recurrent neural networks, which are notoriously difficult to train due
to challenges in backpropagation); and (ii) with appropriately chosen reservoirs, both the
computational and energy costs of training and inference can be much lower compared to
other approaches [5, 7]. The promise of QC resides in the favourable scaling of computa-
tional resources, compared to the best-known classical methods, expected when quantum
algorithms are applied to certain problems, such as factoring large numbers or simulating
quantum systems, making QC an obvious candidate in the efforts to optimise the computing
load across several disciplines [8].
   In this contribution, we explore quantum reservoir computing (QRC) as an emerging ma-
chine learning paradigm that combines quantum evolution with non-trivial, high-dimensional
feature processing. We concentrate on physical systems that are based on neutral atom
arrays, with arbitrary connectivity and strong interactions. Such systems can naturally
simulate complex multi-qubit models and their dynamics, satisfying one of the main re-
quirements of reservoir computing. We describe in full generality the QRC paradigm, and
highlight the differences from other Quantum Machine Learning (QML) approaches. We
complement such analysis with exemplary applications of neutral atoms to relevant tasks in
QRC, suggesting a novel hybrid scheme to leverage NISQ devices for early implementations.
   Building on such discussion, we argue how QC can amplify other non-von Neumann
models of computation, providing benefits from coherent operation and entanglement, and
in particular offer a promising venue to expand efforts in the direction of reservoir and
neuromorphic computing paradigms.

                                             3
II.     BASICS OF RESERVOIR COMPUTING


      Reservoir computing (RC) systems have been long proposed and successfully applied
across a wide range of domains. As outlined in [5], these applications can be broadly
categorized into a few main areas: signal classification (e.g., spoken digit recognition), time
series prediction (e.g., stock market forecasting), control of dynamical systems (e.g., real-
time robot control), and PDE-based computations (e.g., fast simulation of certain physical
systems governed by differential equations).
      Formally, a RC system operates as follows. Let the input data be denoted by u1 , . . . , ut ,
where each ui ∈ Rn , and let ui (j) denote the jth entry of ui . We index the data according
to the order in which it is presented to the learner, to emphasize potential temporal depen-
dencies. The dynamical map that describes the reservoir evolution is denoted by R, and in
typical digital implementations, it is parameterized by a set of (fixed) random matrices W .
At each time step t, the reservoir state rt is given by the recursive relation

                                     rt = R(ut , rt−1 ; W ) ∈ RN .                             (1)

For a suitable choice of R, rt is a function of the past inputs up to a typical characteristic
time scale, tFM , known as fading memory time, e.g.

                                         rt = rt ({ui }tt−tFM ),                               (2)

allowing the system to encode temporal dependencies in its state.
      Finally, a linear readout layer Wout ∈ Rm×N is trained to produce

                                            yt = Wout rt ,                                     (3)

where yt ∈ Rm is the output, i.e. the reservoir prediction at time t. Therefore, we can
distinguish three main subroutines: i) data embedding, ii) dynamical mapping, and iii)
post-processing for training and prediction. When studying what makes a good reservoir,
there are certain key considerations.
      A crucial one is whether the reservoir exhibits some form of fading memory. This require-
ment is twofold: first, the state of the reservoir should depend on past inputs. However, the
reservoir should primarily depend on recent inputs rather than inputs from the distant past.
The first aspect is typically quantified by the short-term memory capacity of the system [9],

                                                  4
while the second is referred to as the echo state property [10] and can be measured, for in-
stance, using the echo state property index [11]. The fading memory is imprinted naturally
in the dynamical map Eq. (2), which exploits non-linear activation functions crucial for good
performance.
   Equally important is the presence of non-linearity in the reservoir internal dynamics.
Since the readout layer is typically linear like in Eq. (3), the reservoir must introduce suf-
ficient complexity to allow for non-trivial transformations of the input. This often requires
tuning the system close to the edge of chaos — a regime where the dynamics are rich and
sensitive to inputs, but not so unstable that they become unpredictable, or input informa-
tion is completely scrambled. This balance ensures a high-dimensional, expressive training
space while keeping enough structure for meaningful processing.
   A significant portion of research in RC is dedicated to identifying physical systems that
can effectively implement the reservoir mapping r specified in Eq. (1). As detailed in Ref. [5],
various platforms have been explored for this purpose, including but not limited to: memris-
tors [12], spintronic devices [13], photonic systems [14], and digital FPGAs and ASICs [15].



III.   QUANTUM SYSTEMS AS RESERVOIRS


   A novel proposal in this direction is to use quantum systems – particularly quantum
computers, whether digital or analog – as reservoirs. Quantum systems are solid candidates
for reservoirs due to their inherently complex, high-dimensional state spaces and non-trivial
dynamics. The underlying idea is straightforward: quantum states live in exponentially
large Hilbert spaces, making them natural candidates for generating high-dimensional rep-
resentations suitable for training a linear readout. Inspired by features emerging from the
QML field – as discussed in Sect. III A – a growing body of literature has investigated how
to effectively leverage quantum systems as reservoirs, as pioneered by works such as [16, 17]
and surveyed e.g. in [18].
   In this contribution, we emphasise how it can be especially promising to adopt quan-
tum systems exhibiting strong interactions such as lattices of Rydberg atoms (qubits), see
Sect. III B. These systems naturally support rich entanglement and strongly-correlated be-
haviour, allowing them to efficiently encode and process temporal correlations in the inputs.
Moreover, their tunable interaction strengths and coherence properties enable precise con-

                                              5
trol over the dynamical regime, making it possible to steer the system toward the optimal
balance between memory and nonlinearity required for effective reservoir computing.


     A.    From quantum feature maps to quantum reservoirs


     In classical machine learning, feature mapping (FM) is a well established concept whereby
a certain vector of data u ∈ U (the feature)1 gets mapped via a transformation f from the
initial space U to a different feature one, in order to better exploit some properties of the
transformed dataset f (u) ∈ F. A commonly used example is achieving the linear separability
of a dataset for classification purposes, when adopting a Support Vector Machine (e.g. [19]).
     A key problem in QML is to load a typically classical input on a quantum device, in
order to further process it. The way to achieve this typically invokes a quantum feature map
acting on a (classical) input u, and targeting a quantum Hilbert space H such that:

                                             u ∈ U → |ψ(u)⟩ .                                           (4)

This mapping is often a quantum circuit parameterised via u known as the ansatz, and
acting as a unitary transformation Uψ [f (u)] of an initial fiducial state, onto the quantum
state |ψ(u)⟩ ∈ H, where we adopted the common braket notation. The features u can then
be extracted (in part or in full) by measuring the expectation value of an observable as

                                         ⟨O⟩ = ⟨ψ(u)| O |ψ(u)⟩ ,                                        (5)

which implies an additional (non-linear) transformation of the data. Therefore, one may
treat not only the data encoding f but also the associated measurement as the feature
map, as the latter is inherited in order to extract any information from a quantum state.
Various possible encodings are possible, impacting the scaling in the width and depth of
the quantum circuit required to embed a dataset of given dimensionality, e.g. M copies of
size N ≡ dim(u), but also the suitability of the protocol in near-term quantum devices. A
review of the main possible techniques can be found e.g. in [20], and state-of-art methods
have produced highly expressive feature maps by appropriately combining classical and
quantum operations [19, 21].

1
    For notation brevity we use u for both vectors and scalars, and the nature of u is self-explanatory from

    the context.


                                                    6
FIG. 1. Impact of various feature map encodings. (Left) Single-qubit case with 1D data u on the
outcome, expressed as the expectation value of a state RZ [f (u)] |+⟩. (Middle) 2-qubit case, where
two types of observables are extracted, as distinguished by dashed versus solid lines. The colours
identify different feature map encodings (identity and tanh). (Right) 8-qubit case encoding a 3D
time-series, i.e. dim(u) = 3, and values of various colour-encoded observables as a function of time.

     We illustrate various feature maps (both on the level of unitary encoding and measure-
ment) in Fig. 1. First, we consider the most basic scheme of a single-qubit system that
is transformed with respect to a single-qubit rotation RZ (α) = exp(−iαZ/2), where Z is
                                                    √
the Pauli-Z matrix, and the initial state |+⟩ = 1/ 2(|0⟩ + |1⟩). Taking Pauli-X as the
observable O, the expectation value with respect to the output state |ψ(a)⟩ = RZ (a) |+⟩
is given as ⟨X⟩ = cos(a). Note that the cosine argument can also undergo a feature map
transformation as a ≡ f (u), yielding ⟨O⟩ = cos[f (u)]. We illustrate also the impact of
replacing the identity mapping f ≡ id with various non-linear functions: f ≡ tanh, f ≡ cos
and f ≡ arccos2 . Similarly in Fig. 1(middle), we consider two-qubit case, where the initial
state |+⟩ |+⟩ is first rotated with RZ (a) ⊗ RZ (a) (same Z rotation acting on each qubit)
followed by CX gate. In 2-qubit case, we have more abundant structure of observables that
one can measure, and we compare single-qubit expectation value ⟨X1 ⟩ and 2-qubit correlator
⟨X1 X2 ⟩ with different feature maps encoding the input data. For both single- and two-qubit
toy examples, one notices that different encodings transform the data in completely different
manner, leaving us with a flexible subroutine to meet machine learning objectives. Finally,
for a multiqubit system and multi-parameter input data (previously u ≡ u was a scalar), the
landscape looks more complex. To illustrate this, we plot in Fig. 1(right) various observables
extracted from encoding input data from the chaotic system Lorenz63 detailed and adopted
2
    Note that in case of arccos(·) we operate on a truncated domain


                                                    7
later in Sec. III C. Here, the dependency is against time, as the Lorenz63 is a 3D time-series
and the encoding phase mixes all components of the input vector together.
   When bearing in mind the requirements for a good reservoir structure elicited in Sect. III,
a first question concerning Eq. (4) is: to what extent can we introduce non-linearities in a
quantum reservoir adopting a FM scheme? In the classical case, such non-linearities where
naturally present in the dynamical map. However, the evolution of a closed quantum system
(an approximation valid for many quantum devices) is linear and described by unitary
transformations U . Then, a natural choice is to invoke a non-linear behaviour within the
feature map encoding of the data. That is, f (u) shall be a non-linear function of u.
   Additional challenges and opportunities arise when considering the way we extract clas-
sical information from a quantum system – i.e. the measurement. The latter invokes the
estimation of observables, i.e. special operators acting on the system’s Hilbert space. In
a quantum reservoir framework, this measurement step preludes the final, linear readout
operation in Eq. (3). However, a well-known aspect of quantum measurement is that it
collapses the internal state of the system in a non-reversible fashion, producing a classically
processable bitstring as a result, of the same size as the number of qubits in the device. Each
bit therein represents the collapsed value in the computational basis of the corresponding
qubit, and average estimates like Eq. (5) require access to many copies of the same state,
and repeated measurements.
   The requirements to build a reservoir are somewhat different from other QML tasks
like linear regression or classification, where the reset of the system’s memory after each
measurement does not pose any fundamental issues. Fading memory requirements conflict
with “forgetting” the process generating the output quantum state - which is, to some
extent, the outcome of the measurement process. Therefore, other strategies are required
to restore the ability of a quantum system to retain memory of past inputs, highlighting a
central challenge in quantum reservoir computing design, that we discuss in further details
in Sect. IV.



   B.   Neutral atom dynamics


   Let us consider a specific example of a quantum system suitable for use as a reser-
voir: analog quantum simulators based on neutral atoms, particularly arrays of Rydberg

                                             8
atoms [22]. These systems are currently capable of storing hundreds of physical qubits in
vacuum chambers sitting at room temperatures, which can be manipulated by laser address-
ing of appropriate frequency, and engineered pulses. In general, such a system comprising
n atoms can be described by a Hamiltonian of the form3 :
                                            X
                                            n                                  X
                  H({Ωj }, {δj }, U, t) =         (Ωj (t) Xj + δj (t) nj ) +         Uij (t)ni nj ,   (6)
                                            j=1                                i<j

where nj = (1 + Zj )/2 is the number operator. The first two parameters Ω (amplitude) and
δ (detuning) are connected with the laser light - atoms interaction, whereas the coupling
strengths Uij can be tuned independently from each other. In principle, all three parameters
are dependent on time t, as pulses can be modulated, and the atom positions can be modified
via optical-tweezers during the computation allowing for additional operations [23].
     In our tests we tend to implement less general versions of Eq. (6). The three parameters
can often be considered static in time, as some Neutral-Atom devices have adopted fixed
atom arrays throughout the computation (thus making Uij constant), and the modulation of
the pulses occurs on timescales fast enough, that can be considered constant at least block-
wise in terms of overall system evolution. An important simplification is also attained by
adopting global Ω, δ for the whole array, as this removes the demanding requirement of laser-
addressing single atomic sites independently [22]. When including all such simplifications,
we are left with a type of Transverse Field Ising Model (TFIM) Hamiltonian [24]:
                                            X
                                            n                        X
                            H(Ω, δ, U ) =         (Ω Xj + δ nj ) +         Uij ni nj .                (7)
                                            j=1                      i<j

Beside the obvious potential of directly quantum-simulating such models directly on a neu-
tral atomic system, Eq. (7) can still be expressive enough to implement machine-learnable
models, as demonstrated e.g. in [19].


     C.   Hybrid Quantum-Classical Reservoir Computing with Neutral Atoms


     In the spirit of targeting early experimental implementations on NISQ available quantum
devices, we focus now on describing a possible hybrid QCRC (hQCRC) framework, suitable
in particular to the neutral atom platform introduced in Sect. III B. A hybrid approach can

3
    Hereby we assume ℏ = 1 to simplify notation.


                                                      9
serve as a remedy for fading memory [25], as (in its most elementary design) the dynamical
map can be split into two parts: classical and quantum. The former handles memory effects,
while the latter exploits an exponentially large Hilbert space for the data encoding. Both
parts process their respective data streams with non-linear characteristics, thus having the
necessary components to form a good RC architecture.
     The framework we propose is inspired by [3] (see also [26] which further exploits classical
processing techniques), with adjustments to the neutral atom platform, which will eventually
provide digital-analog capabilities as in [27]. A schematic workflow focusing on sequential
datasets is depicted in Fig. 2. The framework operates in three phases:

     1. classical data pre-processing — responsible for creating suitable input data to feed in
        the dynamical map as mentioned in Sect. II,

     2. quantum encoding — a subroutine of the dynamical mapping whose general behaviour
        we described in Eq. (2),

     3. classical post-processing — combining contributions from the classical and quantum
        dynamical maps, whose output serves training or prediction purposes.

This is evidently a hybrid classical-quantum-classical scheme, relying on various transforma-
tions. First (i), the input data is prepared as {Yi (t)} to fit the quantum ansatz, representing
a quantum subroutine of the dynamical map, hence it is transformed via combination of lin-
ear and non-linear transformations fiDE : Dinput → Dlayer , where Dinput/layer is the dimension
of input/layer. Linear transformations are matrix multiplication with fixed - usually random
- matrices WiDE – see also Eq. (3) – whereas the non-linear ones are activation functions
similar to those elicited in Fig. 1.
     The input data is transformed n-times with different (random) WiDE and different fiDE ,
where n is the number of parameterized (data-dependent) layers in the quantum circuit
(ii). The quantum ansatz is constructed by first fixing the arrangement of atoms4 , which
is responsible for interaction between atoms and thus also the generation of entanglement.
Next a series of laser pulses, algorithmically arranged into layers, are applied to encode the
transformed data into a quantum state through time-dependent evolution. Each layer has
4
    In principle the arrangement could also depend on transformed data Yi (t), however changing the ar-

    rangement from iteration to iteration extends wall-clock execution time, therefore one needs to take these

    overheads into account.

                                                     10
a number of tunable parameters: Ω, δ, ϕ (described in Sect. III B) as well as the duration
(which is fixed per-layer in our experiments). The number of terms depends on the type
of pulses that are applied, e.g. with local pulses one has the flexibility to address 1 to
N − 1 different atoms, while global pulses addressing the whole atom register allow for
adjustment of only the introduced parameters. Also, in principle the shape of each pulse
can be modelled in a time-dependent fashion; however, constant pulses can still provide
sufficient data encoding expressivity. Future generations of neutral atom platforms are
expected to provide even more flexibility, for example, Raman transitions and in-processing
layout re-arrangement are areas of active research [22, 23].
   The quantum state after the full evolution, i.e. when all layers have been applied, has
the form
                      |ψ(t)⟩ = UG [Yn (t)] . . . UL [Y2 (t)] UG [Y1 (t)] |0⟩⊗N ,           (8)

where UG/L [Yi (t)] is a global/local unitary (pulse) parameterized by transformed data Yi (t).
This state is then measured according to a measurement protocol that enables us to create a
measurement vector Mt composed of expectation values of selected observables. For example,
for Z type measurements, one may create a measurement vector comprised of single-qubit
expectation values and two-qubit correlators as

                    Mt = (⟨Z1 ⟩, ⟨Z2 ⟩ . . . , ⟨ZN ⟩⟨Z1 Z2 ⟩, . . . ⟨ZN −1 ZN ⟩)T ,        (9)

where the ansatz design specify which qubits and what correlators are used. The goal
of a quantum encoding subroutine is to spread classical data in a high-dimensional Hilbert
space, whilst preserving the possibility for measurement protocols to extract such compressed
information. Hence, the structure of the protocol is treated as a hyperparameter of the
network that needs to be carefully selected, ideally taking into account trade-offs between
the number of the measurements and informational content they carry on in a measurement
vector.
   As a final step (iii), we process available streams of data: input data, measurement vector
and previous reservoir states to construct a compact reservoir state rt

             rt = (1 − α)rt−1 + αgWg [fX (WX ut ) + fr (Wr rt−1 ) + fM (WM Mt )] ,        (10)

where α is a leak rate, fX , fr , fM are non-linear functions responsible for transforming the
input data ut , previous reservoir state rt−1 and measurement vector Mt , that first undergo

                                                11
                                                         UG [Y1(t)]                                                                            UG [Yn(t)]
                                                                                                                    Circuit
             Data                                                                                                  encoding
           encoding
                                                   Y1(1)(t)                                                                               Yn(1)(t)
                        Y1(t)




                                             Ω




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Measurement protocol
                                                   Y1(2)(t)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yn(2)(t)




                                      Global
                                        δ
                        Y2(t)                      Y1(3)(t)                                                                               Yn(3)(t)




                                       ϕ
     ut
                        Y3(t)                                                Y2(1)(t)       Y2(2)(t)    Y2(3)(t)        Y2(N )(t)




                                      Ω
                                                                             Y2(N+1)(t) Y2(N+2)(t) Y2(N+3)(t)           Y2(2N )(t)




                                           Local
                                       δ
                        Yn(t)                                                Y2(2N+1)(t)   Y2(2N+2)(t) Y2(2N+3)(t)      Y2(3N )(t)

                                       ϕ

          Yi(t) = fiDE (WiDEut)                                Fixed
                                                                                           UL [Y2(t)]
                                                              Layout
                                                                                                         | ψ(t)⟩ = UG [Yn(t)]…UL [Y2(t)] UG [Y1(t)] | 0⟩⊗N

                                                                           Reservoir creation
                                                                                   &                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="GUM9lwTXGbFGHpWanBPr83uxHZc=">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</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hZ1 i
                                                                               training                                                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hZ2 i
                 rt = (1 − α)rt−1 + αgWg [ fX(WXut) + fr(Wrrt−1) + fM(WM Mt)]
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..                        C
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                        C
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      hZN i                      C
                                                                                                                                                     Mt = B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     hZ1 Z2 i                    C
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hZ1 Z3 i
                                                                                           Wout = URT (RRT + η𝕀)
                                                                                                                                                          B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                  Rt = (1,fu(ut), fR(rt))
                                                                       T                                                                                  @                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ...                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hZN 1 ZN i




FIG. 2. A representation of the 3 phases of the suggested hybrid Quantum Reservoir Computing
protocol. A data encoding manipulates the initial vector ut into a modified Yi (t) which is then
encoded into the quantum circuit, where i indicates the layer in which the data is injected. The
encoding is here exemplified for a Neutral Atom architecture compatible with Eq. (6), and processes
                  (j)
the input Yi (t) according to the chosen (sets of) free parameters j such as Ω, δ, ϕ, alternatively
operating at a global or local level (details in the main text). The pulse sequences shown for the
circuit encoding are generated in Pulser [28]. The readout from the quantum circuit Mt is finally
post-processed in a reservoir-like fashion compatible with the relation (1), and trained until rt
reproduces the target dataset. Phases implemented in classical (quantum) devices are encircled in
dark (light) gray boxes.

linear transformation with fixed (usually random) matrices WX , Wr and WM , respectively.
The entire second part can additionally be transformed in a similar way, i.e. a combination
of linear and non-linear parts with a function gWg ≡ g(Wg ·). The reservoir state update is
responsible for memory effects by mixing previous states with current construction, allowing
it to learn time characteristics. The reservoir states are constituents of a reservoir vector Rt

                                                                Rt = (1, fu (ut ), fR (rt ))T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (11)

where unity plays the role of a bias, and fx , fR are non-linear activation functions for the

                                                                               12
input data ut and the reservoir state rt 5 , respectively. The reservoir vectors are then ag-
gregated into a matrix R = [Rp , Rp+1 , . . . , Rd ], where we discarded the first p − 1 vectors
to avoid reliance on the initial conditions, and kept remaining vectors from the training set
(t = 1, 2, . . . , d, keeping d − p). The collected reservoir vectors are used to determine an
output matrix Wout in the ridge regression procedure that aims to find least-square mean
between target data u = [up , up+1 , . . . , ud ] and the training data R as
                                                               −1
                                Wout = URT RRT + ηI                ,                                     (12)

where η is regularization coefficient that stabilize the solution. The output matrix is then
used to predict future time-steps as

                                yt+1 = Wout Rt ,      for t = d, d + 1, . . . .                          (13)

This setup gives us a flexible and modular approach that can be easily adjusted to hard-
ware restrictions, e.g. the currently cloud-available neutral-atom hardware supports global
channels only [28, 29]. Additionally, it provides a great test-bed for investigating the tran-
sition between classical and quantum reservoir computing. In particular, one can turn off
the quantum part by setting fM ≡ 0 or turn off the dependence of the reservoir states
on the input data (setting fX ≡ 0) to investigate the importance of quantum or classical
contribution. The standard echo state network is recovered for fX = fr = id, fM ≡ 0 and
gWg = tanh (see, for example, [30]).
     As a demonstration of the functionality of the approach, we present in Fig. 3 a comparison
between the predictions from Eq.(10) with and without the quantum part, i.e. when fM ≡ id
and fM ≡ 0, respectively. The results here are based on a standard chaotic benchmark -
Lorenz63 [4, 31] - that allows us to assess the performance of the framework in a challenging
time-series forecasting task. For the quantum phase, we adopt an ansatz spanning an 8-
qubit register, where the measurement protocol is fixed, composed of Z-type measurements
to get ⟨Zi ⟩, ⟨Zi Zj ⟩ and ⟨Zi Zj Zk ⟩ on all possible combinations of i, j, k. We stress that a fixed
approach, may not necessarily be the most optimal, as it lacks any information or feedback
about the problem. The purpose of the displayed results is to demonstrate the relevance
of the quantum part, as all other parameters are the same, serving as a fair comparison
5
    In principle, one can combine these non-linear transformations, with yet another set of linear transforma-

    tions. Our numerical experiments on small system sizes suggest that it is unnecessary to obtain reasonably

    good outcomes.


                                                     13
between classical and quantum. Therefore, one may perceive the contribution from the
quantum processing as a beneficial addition to the classical system, which is based on ex-
ploiting the Hilbert space (circuit) encoding and extracting of information from the quantum
states via measurements. Note that we did not optimize over the ansatz hyperparameters,
leaving this additional improvement for future contribution, and rather treat these results
as a representative co-processing boost that can be attained by our hQRC approach, when
running on an analog neutral atom platform. A more thorough benchmark will be required
to assess average performances and benefits of our protocol (similar to what attained in [3]
for a gate-based approach). Further details are reported in an external repository [32].
   The purpose of the displayed results is to demonstrate the relevance of the quantum
part, as all other parameters are the same, serving as a fair comparison between classical
and quantum. Therefore, one may perceive the contribution from the quantum processing as
a beneficial addition to the classical system (blue line in Fig. 3), which is based on exploit-
ing the Hilbert space (circuit) encoding and extracting of information from the quantum
states via measurements. Note that we did not optimize over the ansatz hyperparameters.
These results are thus intended as a representative co-processing boost attainable via our
hQCRC approach on existing analog neutral atom platforms. More thorough benchmarks
will be required to assess average performances and ultimate benefits of a hybrid protocol
(as attained in [3] for digital approaches).



IV.   THE ROAD SO FAR, THE ROAD TO COME


   In Sect. III, we have elicited some fundamental challenges impacting in general the use
of quantum systems as performing reservoirs beyond feature mapping – such as the ability
to retain fading memory over sequences of inputs, a hallmark of RC. We thus described in
Sect. III C how one can defy such criticalities in an exemplary demonstration, focusing on a
neutral atom platform and benefitting from a hybrid architecture to bypass some desirable
reservoir properties lacking from what readily implementable in the described quantum
device. Here, we intend to discuss in perspective some of these design choices, and how they
might evolve in the near future.
   While quantum systems are naturally suited for generating expressive, high-dimensional
representations, ensuring that they also possess the temporal dynamics necessary for memory

                                               14
FIG. 3. Prediction phase of the normalized Lorenz63 time-series benchmark (black) for x, y and z
components (left to right). The red line represents a numerical simulation of the hQCRC frame-
work in (10) (i.e. fM ≡ id), whereas the blue line synthetically retrieves a classical-phase only
performance by imposing fM ≡ 0 in the same equation, while the green line uses fX ≡ 0, i.e. the
reservoir rt depends only on measurements extracted from the quantum states Mt . Finally, the teal
line depicts the best performing setup for classical RC. Implementations details of the circuit in the
main text. The shaded region describes ± standard deviation over 20 random seeds of quantum
reservoirs.


remains non-trivial. We elicited before the incompatibility between projective quantum
measurements and the necessity for the reservoir to retain memory during the processing. A
straightforward workaround is to reinitialize and evolve the quantum reservoir from scratch
for each new data point, but this quickly becomes intractable as the number of inputs
grows. Hybrid approaches like ours, or the one introduced in [25], outsource the memory
build-up to classical co-processing. A more advanced approach for mitigating this issue
would be to adopt so-called weak measurements, which are agnostic to the specific quantum
hardware used. Rather than performing a full projective measurement – as illustrated before,
which collapses the quantum state entirely – weak measurements couple “reservoir qubits”
to “ancillary qubits”. Only the latter are targeted to extract classical information, with
minimal disturbance to the reservoir quantum state. This strategy implies a careful trade-
off between the strength of the measurement, the memory capacity of the reservoir, and
the computational overhead of resetting the system to successfully perform on benchmark
tasks [33, 34].

   On the other side, a proper reservoir’s behaviour shall prioritise recent inputs, and thus
needs to erase information over time. Mathematically, it means that the map that describes

                                                15
the reservoir state evolution, r in Eq. (2), needs to be a contraction. As a consequence,
the fully unitary dynamics introduced in Sect. III is not suitable for QRC purposes. Again,
in our hQCRC setting, this issue is overcome by post-processing the measured data from
the quantum system with a classical fading memory function. However, moving to a fully
quantum regime, fading memories could only be obtained if non-negligible losses are present
[35]. Within this strategy, an envisioned setting is to evolve an initial quantum state but
extract classical information only via measurements on a subsystem. Concretely, for a
neutral atom system compatible with the one in Fig. 2, one starts with an N -qubit initial
state |0⟩⊗N , and maps e.g. the transformed input Y1 (t) to a set of Hamiltonian parameters
 (1,2,3)
Y1         . Due to the presence of losses, the evolved state after a fixed time t becomes a more
                          (1,2,3)
complex function L(Y1               , t) generalising over Eq. (8), where L is the so-called Liouvillian
which models the lossy reservoir evolution. The reservoir state r1 is extracted by weak-
measuring a subset of M < N atoms, e.g., repeating the experiments so that finite-shot
expectation values of local observables can be computed. For each subsequent input ut , the
                                                               (1,2,3)
procedure can be repeated, but the additional L(Yn                       , t) acts on the quantum state as
evolved until the previous n − 1 timestep, and altered by the weak measurement.
     In a more general case, depending on the particular encoding, different physical properties
of the quantum system itself can be used for introducing effective losses to the system.
For example, if the input is encoded in a reservoir subsystem, scrambling dynamics are
favourable for having a fading memory [36]. Also, many open quantum systems are described
by a Markovian behaviour, which erases information of past inputs exponentially fast over
time [37], precluding the possibility of solving tasks where a coexistence of short and long
time correlations is needed. This challenge, in a fully quantum case, can only be addressed
with the introduction of quantum non-Markovianity [37]. However, hybrid scenarios like the
one introduced can leverage upon classical memory to allow for such longer time correlations.
     Another fundamental challenge is the extraction of information from the quantum device,
encompassing beyond RC to more generic quantum machine learning tasks. Data processing
is expected to occur in the vast Hilbert space available already to modest-sized quantum
devices, however it is often lower-dimensional classical data that are required as the usable
output for real-world tasks. This throughput mismatch is known as the readout problem,
and it is closely related to concentration phenomena. Specific techniques are being explored
to extract such crux of information [38], often at the heart of the performance of quantum

                                                     16
algorithms. In our specific case, this readout challenge emerges naturally e.g. when adopt-
ing ancillary subsystems and scrambling dynamics, because the number of measurements
needed to properly compute the reservoir response can exponentially scale with the reservoir
dimension [39, 40] and only the presence of appropriate symmetries can solve the issue [40].
A measurement overhead problem can also be present in the neutral atom setting considered
here, as the system size scales and (linearly) more expectations values need being computed
in Eq. (9). Possible strategies for dealing with this issue will be the topic of further research.
     On the positive side, QRC does not require expensive circuit gradient estimate and op-
timization [10], which affects instead other variational QML techniques. Therefore, it could
elude trainability issues connected with the emergence of complex or flat optimization land-
scapes [41], whilst harnessing the expressivity accessible to complex, high-dimensional quan-
tum states to potentially capture patterns in specific datasets better than classical tools [25].
     Finally, we can safely assume that noise limitations in the quantum device of choice
for QRC implementations will play a crucial role in dictating architectures. At a stage
in quantum computing where extremely different technologies coexist, to the point that
appropriate cross-platform benchmarking is still an actively developed and debated research
topic [1, 42], it is expected how different quantum architectural choices - with their strengths
and weaknesses in terms of gate fidelity, scalability in circuit width and depth, repetition
rate and access to native operations - will influence the design of the corresponding QRC
protocols. Indeed, each of these aspects will impact differently noise on the processing and
readout phases. In this contribution we focused on a Neutral Atom implementation, but
even restricting ourselves to a single platform and its related noise model, we can envisage
how a careful design and optimisation of the ansatz can bring massive performance benefits.
The long-term complexity of this optimisation problem, as circuits scale beyond classical
simulability and ease of result interpretation, will eventually invoke the aid of automated
strategies, similarly to what has happened in the field of variational QML with Quantum
Architecture Search schemes [43].



V.     CONCLUSIONS


     We have presented a vision for quantum reservoir computing implemented in a hybrid
quantum-classical framework (hQCRC). The purpose of this approach is to mitigate all

                                              17
shortcomings of a quantum system for being a potent reservoir, while taking advantage of
exponentially large Hilbert spaces.
   In this regard, we showed that (quantum) feature maps represent an important tool for
reservoir computing, as they enable processing in such high-dimensional latent space. We
mitigated the impact of destructive measurements by moving the memory part of the reser-
voir from the quantum subroutine to a classical one. We also combined the encoding of input
data into quantum states through analog evolution (data-to-circuit), with non-linearities as-
sociated with the measurement protocol. Additionally, our hQCRC framework uses feature
maps on the level of classical reservoir states, making it more flexible to accommodate com-
plex tasks. The balance between purely classical and hybrid processing in our approach can
be tuned and the quantum part easily turned completely off, to study the impact of the
latter on task performances.
   Crucially, we highlighted how our hQCRC can fit current and future hardware. We
demonstrated how the mapping described above can invoke arrays of interacting qubits,
where reconfigurable Rydberg neutral atom arrays represent a prominent example of such
a quantum architecture. The modularity of the quantum circuit construction enables us
to scale complexity of each component in the framework - type and number of operations
addressing the qubits, the size of the register and the number of extracted observables
(which translates into reservoir sizes). Therefore, one can adjust the hQCRC approach to
meet hardware restrictions.
   We demonstrated in a proof-of-concept experiment, how the hQCRC implemented on a
simulated neutral-atom platform can predict future evolution of chaotic time-series system,
and the quantum subroutine can be effectively exploited to augment the performance of
a classical counterpart. Our results show how the efficient combination of quantum and
classical resources can be beneficial for information processing in typical reservoir computing
tasks, such as time-series prediction. Our work opens a route to new quantum-classical
reservoir computing approaches and raises the question of useful resources in the hybrid
domain.
   Acknowledgements C.G. O.K. & A.A.G. acknowledge the support from the Euro-
pean Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation program under Grant Agreement
No. 101070347-MANNGA. Views and opinions expressed are those of the authors only
and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Health

                                             18
and Digital Executive Agency (HADEA). Neither the European Union nor the grant-
ing authority can be held responsible for them.         O.K. acknowledges support from the
QCi3 Hub (grant number EP/Z53318X/1). A. S. acknowledges the Spanish State Re-
search Agency, through the Marı́a de Maeztu project CEX2021-001164-M funded by the
MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, through the COQUSY project PID2022-140506NB-
C21 and -C22 funded by MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, MINECO through the QUAN-
TUM SPAIN project, and EU through the RTRP - NextGenerationEU within the framework
of the Digital Spain 2025 Agenda. A.S. also acknowledges the CSIC Interdisciplinary The-
matic Platform (PTI+) on Quantum Technologies in Spain (QTEP+) and the support of a
fellowship from the “la Caixa” Foundation (ID 100010434 - LCF/BQ/DI23/11990081).




 [1] Timothy Proctor, Kevin Young, Andrew D Baczewski, and Robin Blume-Kohout. Bench-
    marking quantum computers. Nature Reviews Physics, pages 1–14, 2025.
 [2] Adam Callison and Nicholas Chancellor. Hybrid quantum-classical algorithms in the noisy
    intermediate-scale quantum era and beyond. Physical Review A, 106(1):010101, 2022.
 [3] Filip Wudarski, Daniel OConnor, Shaun Geaney, Ata Akbari Asanjan, Max Wilson, Elena
    Strbac, P Aaron Lott, and Davide Venturelli. Hybrid quantum-classical reservoir computing
    for simulating chaotic systems. preprint arXiv:2311.14105, 2023.
 [4] Jason A Platt, Stephen G Penny, Timothy A Smith, Tse-Chun Chen, and Henry DI Abar-
    banel. A systematic exploration of reservoir computing for forecasting complex spatiotemporal
    dynamics. Neural Networks, 153:530–552, 2022.
 [5] Min Yan, Can Huang, Peter Bienstman, Peter Tino, Wei Lin, and Jie Sun. Emerging oppor-
    tunities and challenges for the future of reservoir computing. Nature Communications, 15,
    2024.
 [6] Danijela Marković, Alice Mizrahi, Damien Querlioz, and Julie Grollier. Physics for neuromor-
    phic computing. Nature Reviews Physics, 2(9):499–510, 2020.
 [7] Daniel J Gauthier, Erik Bollt, Aaron Griffith, and Wendson AS Barbosa. Next generation
    reservoir computing. Nature communications, 12(1):5564, 2021.
 [8] Hsin-Yuan Huang, Soonwon Choi, Jarrod R McClean, and John Preskill. The vast world of
    quantum advantage. preprint arXiv:2508.05720, 2025.

                                              19
 [9] Herbert Jaeger and Harald Haas. Harnessing nonlinearity: Predicting chaotic systems and
    saving energy in wireless communication. Science, 304(5667):78–80, 2004.
[10] Herbert Jaeger.   The “echo state” approach to analysing and training recurrent neural
    networks-with an erratum note. German NRC for information technology - technical report,
    148, 2001.
[11] Claudio Gallicchio et al. Chasing the echo state property. In ESANN 2019-Proceedings, 27th
    European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine
    Learning. ESANN, 2019.
[12] Yanan Zhong, Jianshi Tang, Xinyi Li, Bin Gao, He Qian, and Huaqiang Wu. Dynamic
    memristor-based reservoir computing for high-efficiency temporal signal processing. Nature
    communications, 12, 2021.
[13] Giovanni Finocchio, Massimiliano Di Ventra, Kerem Y Camsari, Karin Everschor-Sitte, Pe-
    dram Khalili Amiri, and Zhongming Zeng. The promise of spintronics for unconventional
    computing. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 521, 2021.
[14] Guy Van der Sande, Daniel Brunner, and Miguel C Soriano. Advances in photonic reservoir
    computing. Nanophotonics, 6, 2017.
[15] Bogdan Penkovsky, Laurent Larger, and Daniel Brunner. Efficient design of hardware-enabled
    reservoir computing in fpgas. Journal of Applied Physics, 124, 2018.
[16] Keisuke Fujii and Kohei Nakajima. Quantum reservoir computing: a reservoir approach
    toward quantum machine learning on near-term quantum devices. Reservoir Computing:
    Theory, Physical Implementations, and Applications, 2021.
[17] Danijela Marković and Julie Grollier. Quantum neuromorphic computing. Applied physics
    letters, 2020.
[18] Pere Mujal, Rodrigo Martı́nez-Peña, Johannes Nokkala, Jorge Garcı́a-Beni, Gian Luca Giorgi,
    Miguel C Soriano, and Roberta Zambrini. Opportunities in quantum reservoir computing and
    extreme learning machines. Advanced Quantum Technologies, 4, 2021.
[19] Boris Albrecht, Constantin Dalyac, Lucas Leclerc, et al. Quantum feature maps for graph
    machine learning on a neutral atom quantum processor. Physical Review A, 107(4):042615,
    2023.
[20] Maria Schuld and Nathan Killoran. Quantum machine learning in feature hilbert spaces.
    Physical review letters, 122(4):040504, 2019.


                                              20
[21] Oleksandr Kyriienko, Annie E Paine, and Vincent E Elfving. Solving nonlinear differential
    equations with differentiable quantum circuits. Physical Review A, 103(5):052416, 2021.
[22] Loı̈c Henriet, Lucas Beguin, Adrien Signoles, Thierry Lahaye, Antoine Browaeys, Georges-
    Olivier Reymond, and Christophe Jurczak.         Quantum computing with neutral atoms.
    Quantum, 4, 2020.
[23] Dolev Bluvstein, Simon J Evered, Alexandra A Geim, Sophie H Li, Hengyun Zhou, Tom
    Manovitz, Sepehr Ebadi, Madelyn Cain, Marcin Kalinowski, Dominik Hangleiter, et al. Logical
    quantum processor based on reconfigurable atom arrays. Nature, 626(7997):58–65, 2024.
[24] Henning Labuhn, Daniel Barredo, Sylvain Ravets, Sylvain de Léséleuc, Tommaso Macrı̀,
    Thierry Lahaye, and Antoine Browaeys. Realizing quantum ising models in tunable two-
    dimensional arrays of single rydberg atoms. preprint arXiv:1509.04543, 2015.
[25] Milan Kornjača, Hong-Ye Hu, Chen Zhao, Jonathan Wurtz, Phillip Weinberg, Majd Hamdan,
    Andrii Zhdanov, Sergio H Cantu, Hengyun Zhou, Rodrigo Araiza Bravo, et al. Large-scale
    quantum reservoir learning with an analog quantum computer. preprint arXiv:2407.02553,
    2024.
[26] J Settino, L Salatino, L Mariani, F D’Amore, M Channab, L Bozzolo, S Vallisa, P Barillà,
    A Policicchio, N Lo Gullo, et al. Memory-augmented hybrid quantum reservoir computing.
    Physical Review Applied, 24(2):024019, 2025.
[27] Adrian Parra-Rodriguez, Pavel Lougovski, Lucas Lamata, Enrique Solano, and Mikel Sanz.
    Digital-analog quantum computation. Physical Review A, 101(2):022305, 2020.
[28] Henrique Silvério, Sebastián Grijalva, Constantin Dalyac, Lucas Leclerc, Peter J Karalekas,
    Nathan Shammah, Mourad Beji, Louis-Paul Henry, and Loı̈c Henriet. Pulser: An open-source
    package for the design of pulse sequences in programmable neutral-atom arrays. Quantum,
    6:629, 2022.
[29] Pasqal SaS Cloud Services, 2025. https://docs.pasqal.com/cloud/.
[30] Mantas Lukoševičius. A practical guide to applying echo state networks. In Neural Networks:
    Tricks of the Trade: Second Edition, pages 659–686. Springer, 2012.
[31] Edward N Lorenz. Deterministic nonperiodic flow. Journal of atmospheric sciences, 20(2):130–
    141, 1963.
[32] Zenodo Public Repository. 10.5281/zenodo.17153722, 2025. Code in this repo are embargoed
    until 1/9/2026. Please contact the Authors for early access.


                                              21
[33] Pere Mujal, Rodrigo Martı́nez-Peña, Gian Luca Giorgi, Miguel C Soriano, and Roberta Zam-
    brini. Time-series quantum reservoir computing with weak and projective measurements. npj
    Quantum Information, 9, 2023.
[34] Giacomo Franceschetto, Marcin Plodzień, Maciej Lewenstein, Antonio Acı́n, and Pere Mujal.
    Harnessing quantum back-action for time-series processing. preprint arXiv:2411.03979, 2024.
[35] Antonio Sannia, Rodrigo Martı́nez-Peña, Miguel C. Soriano, Gian Luca Giorgi, and Roberta
    Zambrini. Dissipation as a resource for Quantum Reservoir Computing. Quantum, 8:1291,
    March 2024.
[36] Rodrigo Martı́nez-Peña, Gian Luca Giorgi, Johannes Nokkala, Miguel C Soriano, and Roberta
    Zambrini. Dynamical phase transitions in quantum reservoir computing. Physical Review
    Letters, 127, 2021.
[37] Antonio Sannia, Ricard Ravell Rodrı́guez, Gian Luca Giorgi, and Roberta Zambrini.
    Non-markovianity and memory enhancement in quantum reservoir computing.            preprint
    arXiv:2505.02491, 2025.
[38] Chelsea A Williams, Stefano Scali, Antonio A Gentile, Daniel Berger, and Oleksandr Kyri-
    ienko. Addressing the readout problem in quantum differential equation algorithms with
    quantum scientific machine learning. preprint arXiv:2411.14259, 2024.
[39] Weijie Xiong, Zoë Holmes, Armando Angrisani, Yudai Suzuki, Thiparat Chotibut, and Su-
    panut Thanasilp. Role of scrambling and noise in temporal information processing with quan-
    tum systems. preprint arXiv:2505.10080, 2025.
[40] Antonio Sannia, Gian Luca Giorgi, and Roberta Zambrini. Exponential concentration and
    symmetries in quantum reservoir computing. preprint arXiv:2505.10062, 2025.
[41] Martı́n Larocca, Supanut Thanasilp, Samson Wang, Kunal Sharma, Jacob Biamonte, Patrick J
    Coles, Lukasz Cincio, Jarrod R McClean, Zoë Holmes, and M Cerezo. Barren plateaus in
    variational quantum computing. Nature Reviews Physics, pages 1–16, 2025.
[42] Jeanette Miriam Lorenz, Thomas Monz, Jens Eisert, Daniel Reitzner, Félicien Schopfer,
    Frédéric Barbaresco, Krzysztof Kurowski, Ward van der Schoot, Thomas Strohm, Jean Senel-
    lart, et al. Systematic benchmarking of quantum computers: status and recommendations.
    preprint arXiv:2503.04905, 2025.
[43] Darya Martyniuk, Johannes Jung, and Adrian Paschke. Quantum architecture search: a
    survey. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering


                                             22
(QCE), volume 1, pages 1695–1706. IEEE, 2024.




                                      23
